---
layout: post
title:  "Text files and the command line"
author: at
categories: [ bash, tutorial ]
image: assets/images/code.jpg
hidden: true
---

Here we introduce some new commands and concepts to work with the command line, in particular
for text file parsing and manipulation.

Before you start ensure you downloaded the *learn_bash* directory (see the [first part of the tutorial]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link _posts/2022-03-01-Bash-1.md %}).

:warning: In most of the examples we will see the use of absolute paths like `~/learn_bash-2022/README.md`, because we assume you 
have a *learn_bash-2022* directory in your home folder. Try to practice using relative paths as well!


## find

The `find` command is used to search for files in a directory. Unlike `ls`, it can search for files
matching a pattern, and it can search in subdirectories.

In the Linux flavour of *find*, if you omit a path to scan, it will assume its the current directory. In the version of *find*
installed with MacOS, you need to specify the path to scan, like `find .`.

Some examples:

* List all the files and subdirectories or a directory:

```bash
# Remember that [tab] just means to press Tab, to autocomplete
find ~/learn_b[tab]
```

* List only the subdirectories:

```bash
# If you type `-type f` you will print only the files instead
find ~/learn_bash-2022 -type d
```

* List only items ending by ".faa":

```bash
find ~/learn_bash-2022 -name "*.faa"
```

:bulb: Did you notice that find will report the absolute paths of the files? 

## wild characters and shell expansion

We introduced with the last command a special character, the asterisk `*`, that meant "any string". 
In find, we must surround patterns with double quotes.

We will now try to use `ls` to exemplify the power of shell expansion.

* `*` matches **any string**, including the empty string. For example, `ls *.faa` will match all files ending by `.faa`, while `ls *gene*` will list all files containing the string `gene`.
* `?` matches any **single** character. For example, `ls file?.*` will match all files starting with `file` followed by exactly one more character, then a dot and ending with any string. Examples are "file1.txt", "fileZ.fasta" but not "file12.txt".
* `[A-Z]`, `[a-z]` or `[0-9]` matches any character in the range. For example, `ls file[0-9].*` will match all files starting with `file` followed by a digit, then a dot and ending with any string. Examples are "file1.txt", "file2.fasta" but not "fileB.txt".
* `{this,that}` matches any of the strings separated by commas. For example, `ls {file1,file2}.txt` will match both "file1.txt" and "file2.txt", or `*_R{1,2}.fastq.gz` will match all files ending by "_R1.fastq.gz" and "_R2.fastq.gz".

When we use this syntax, the command will receive the expanded list of matching files. Try with "echo" to see what happens:

```bash
cd ~/learn_bash-2022/files/
echo LIST: *.png
cd -
```

and try to use the `ls` command with the same pattern.

```bash
ls -lh ~/learn_bash-2022/files/*.png
```

### Text files

## wc

The [`wc`](https://manpages.org/wc) command is used to count the number of lines, words and characters in a file. This only applies to simple text files.

```bash
wc ~/learn_bash-2022/README.md
```

If we want, we can print only the lines (with `-l`), words (with `-w`) or characters (with `-c`). 

:question: How many lines are there in  `~/learn_bash-2022/files/README.md`?

## head and tail

The [`head`](https://manpages.org/head) and [`tail`](https://manpages.org/tail) commands are used to print the first or last lines of a file. By default, they print the first 10 lines.
In both commands we can change the number of lines with the `-n` option followed by the number of lines we want.

```bash
# Example:
head -n 3 ~/learn_bash-2022/README.md

tail -n 2  ~/learn_bash-2022/files/cars.csv 
```

## less

In this file we introduced *wc*, *head* and *tail*: they are all non-interactive commands. To interactively browse a file, we can use the [`less`](https://manpages.org/less) command, which has the same interface as the `man` command.

```bash
less ~/learn_bash-2022/files/origin.txt 
```

A useful option is `-S`, which will not wrap long lines, meaning that long lines will not be split.

## grep

The [`grep`](https://manpages.org/grep) command is used to search for a pattern in a file, and it prints the lines matching the pattern.
The general syntax is "grep PATTERN FILE(s)".

```bash
grep "Darwin" ~/learn_bash-2022/files/origin.txt
```

The pattern can be [more complicated](https://manpages.org/regexp) than a simple string,
but we will not cover this here.
To match a pattern insensitive to case, we can use the `-i` option.

```bash
grep -i "darwin" ~/learn_bash-2022/files/origin.txt
```

Some useful options:

* `-c` prints the number of matching lines, instead of the lines themselves.
* `-v` prints the lines that do not match the pattern (inVert match)
* `-n` prints the line number before the line itself.
* `-w` matches only whole words (not substrings)

## cut

The [`cut`](https://manpages.org/cut) command is used to extract columns from a file. 
The general syntax is "*cut -d DELIMITER -f FIELDS FILE(s)*". By default the delimiter is a tab, so you don't 
need to specify 

```bash
# Check the first two lines of the file first
head -n 2 ~/learn_bash-2022/files/cars.csv

# Print only the columns model and cyl (1 and 3)
cut -d "," -f 1,3 ~/learn_bash-2022/files/cars.csv
```

:question: Extract the same columns, but from the file `~/learn_bash-2022/files/cars.tsv` (tab-separated).

## sed

The [`sed`](https://manpages.org/sed) command is used to search and replace text in a file. 
The general syntax is "*sed -e 's/OLD/NEW/g' FILE(s)*".

```bash
# We can replace the "," with a "|"
sed 's/,/|/g' ~/learn_bash-2022/files/cars.csv
```

Here we used an obscure syntax, which will become familiar with practice, as it's borrowed by other tools and
even programming languages: `s/SOMETHING/OTHER/g`. The `s` means "substitute", the `g` means "global" (i.e.
replace all the occurrences.

Try to replace only the first occurrence, removing the `g`:

```bash
sed 's/,/---/' ~/learn_bash-2022/files/cars.csv
```

## sort

The [`sort`](https://manpages.org/sort) command is used to sort the lines of a file. By default, it sorts alphabetically.

```bash
sort ~/learn_bash-2022/files/cars.csv
```

Some options:

* `-t,` to specify the delimiter (in this case, a comma)
* `-k FIELDS` to sort by the given fields (fields being a number or a set of numbers separated by commas)
* `-n` to sort numerically (this is a switch)
* `-r` to sort in reverse order (this is a switch)

```bash
sort -n -t, -k 2 ~/learn_bash-2022/files/cars.csv
```